Yther wip branch (#36)
hammerheim-game/hammerheim-rules: 2-core-rules.md

As well as this book, you will need the following items to play Mordheim.

### Representative models

> You will need enough miniatures of the appropriate race/type to represent the warriors in your warband. It is a good idea to work out your warband on paper first and then purchase the miniatures that you require. It isn't always possible to get your miniatures being completely accurate down to the missing eyeballs, but as long as it is clear which character does what that is usually fine.

Author: ```suggestion
You will need enough miniatures of the appropriate race/type to represent the warriors in your warband. It is a good idea to work out your warband on paper first and then purchase the miniatures that you require. It isn't always possible to get completely accurate miniatures, down to the eyeballs, but as long as it is clear which character is which model, that is usually fine.
```

Reviewer: Yours is better written.

The bitter struggles of a Mordheim battle take place in labyrinthine streets, ruined buildings and on derelict walkways. There are an abundance of companies out there who make terrain ideal for Mordheim, but many gamers enjoy making their own. 

As a rule, a table packed with scenery will lead to closer and more exciting games. The game is in fact balanced around the idea that the board be extremely densely packed with buildings so if that isn't possible it may be worth agreeing with your opponent on a way to reduce the strength of missile attacks.

### Counters

Counters can help you keep track of things on the tabletop. You can always keep notes about who is hidden, carrying treasure, etc, but counters are a convenient memory jogger and speed the game up.  

\page

### Dice

All dice rolls use a standard six-sided dice (usually shortened to D6). Sometimes you will be asked to modify the result of the dice roll. This is noted as D6 plus or minus a number, such as D6 + 1 or D6 - 2. 

Roll the dice and add or subtract the number indicated to get the final result. You may have to roll a number of dice in one go. For example, 2D6 means roll two dice and add the scores together.

> If you are given the opportunity to re-roll a dice roll, you must accept the second score, even if it's worse than the original. You may also never re-roll a dice that you have already re-rolled.

Author: ```suggestion
If you are given the opportunity to re-roll a dice roll, you must accept the second score, even if it's worse than the original. You may never re-roll a dice that you have already re-rolled.
```

Reviewer: 👍

During the movement phase models are moved in the following order:

1. Charge!: If you want a model in your warband to charge at an enemy model and attack it in hand-to-hand combat then you must do this at the start of the movement phase before moving any of your other models. When you charge a model, declare to your opponent that you are doing so and indicate which of their models it is attacking.

2. Compulsory Moves: Sometimes a model is forced to move in a certain way and this is called a compulsory move. For example, a fighter whose nerve breaks must _flee_. A model with the _Random Movement_ rule must move 2D6" in a certain direction. Make all of your models' compulsory moves before finishingany remaining movement.

3. Remaining Moves: Once you have moved your chargers and made any compulsory moves, you may move the rest of your warriors as you see fit.

#### Moving

> During their movement phase, models can move up to movement rate their in any direction. They may move (including running and charging) up and down stairs, and over low obstacles such as barrels, boxes, etc up to 1" high. In normal circumstances models don't have to move their full distance, or at all if you do not want them to. All exceptions are explained later and invariably involve either charging, climbing, or compulsory moves. 

Author: ```suggestion
During their movement phase, models can move up to movement rate their in any direction. They may move (including running and charging) up and down stairs, and over low obstacles such as barrels, boxes, etc., up to 1" high. In normal circumstances models don't have to move their full distance, or at all if you do not want them to. All exceptions are explained later and invariably involve either charging, climbing, or compulsory moves. 
```

Reviewer: Oops

A model can only run if there are no enemy models within 8" of it at the start of the turn (_incapacitated_ and _hidden_ models do not count). Check this distance after any charges have been declared. If there are any enemies within 8" at the start of the turn, the model will prepare to fight instead and so is unable to run. The running model can move closer than 8" to an enemy as it moves. 

Any model that runs loses its chance to shoot during that turn. They are concentrating on running and is not prepared to fight, having sheathed or shouldered their weapons. You should declare that models are running as they move, as this will remind both players that the model is unable to shoot that turn. Running models can cast spells as normal. 

#### Charge!

> If you want a model to engage the enemy in hand-to-hand combat then you must make a special move called a charge. Declare to your opponent that your model is charging and indicate which enemy model they are going to attack. You can charge any opposing model if your warrior has the movement to reach them and has them in sight. If your warrior wants to charge an enemy model that they can't see (e.g., because it is behind a corner or it is in _Hiding_), they must pass an Initiative test to detect it. If they fail the roll your model may not charge this turn as they tentatively roam forwards in search of their opponent. They move up to 4" towards the target, stopping no closer than 1" away from them. A charge is like a running move, performed at double the Movement rate, but ends with the attacker moving into base-to-base contact with the enemy model. Once their bases are touching they are engaged in hand-to-hand combat. Models are also considered to be in hand-to-hand combat even when separated by a low wall or obstacle, where it is impossible for the bases to touch physically because the obstacle is in the way.

Author: ```suggestion
If you want a model to engage the enemy in hand-to-hand combat then you must make a special move called a charge. Declare to your opponent that your model is charging and indicate which enemy model they are going to attack. You can charge any opposing model if your warrior has the movement to reach them and has them in sight. If your warrior wants to charge an enemy model that they can't see (e.g., because it is behind a corner or it is in _Hiding_), they must pass an Initiative test to detect it. If they fail the roll your model may not charge this turn as they tentatively roam forwards in search of their opponent. They move up to 4" towards the target, stopping no closer than 1" away from them. 

A charge is like a running move, performed at double the Movement rate, but ends with the attacker moving into base-to-base contact with the enemy model. Once their bases are touching they are engaged in hand-to-hand combat. Models are also considered to be in hand-to-hand combat even when separated by a low wall or obstacle, where it is impossible for the bases to touch physically because the obstacle is in the way.
```

Reviewer: I like your change!

If you can move your warrior into base contact with more than one enemy model with its charge move, it can charge them both. This might be inadvisable as it'll then be fighting two enemies at once!

#### Hiding

The _Hiding_ rule represents warriors concealing themselves in a way that our unmoving and dramatically posed models cannot. A _Hiding_ warrior conceals themself as best they can by stiffening alongside a column, crouching behind a small wall, or hiding inside a barrel. A model can hide if they end their move behind a low wall, a column or in a similar position where they could reasonably conceal themself. The player must declare that the warrior is hiding for it to count as being _Hidden_. It may be worth placing a counter next to it so that other players are aware of it. 

\page

A model that is _Hidden_ is disregarded by the enemy warband's mandatory decisions. For example, a _Hidden_ model will not prevent an enemy warband from running, will not count as the closest model for the purpose of shooting, and _Frenzied_ models will not have to charge it. It is also considered wholly out of line of sight if an opponent wishes to charge them.

> A model that runs, is _incapacitated_, or charges cannot hide that turn. Their sudden burst of speed does not give them time to hide. They also may not enter the _Hidden_ mode if there are enemies within 4", or if they are within unobstructed line of sight to an enemy.

Author: ```suggestion
A model that runs, is _incapacitated_, or charges cannot hide that turn. Their sudden burst of speed does not give them time to hide. They may not become _Hidden_ if there are enemies within 4", or if they are within unobstructed line of sight to an enemy.
```

Also, the nature of obstruction is unclear here.

Reviewer: Agreed, though I found it difficult to concisely articulate the circumstances where someone could Hide without diagrams. Basically you can't go into hide if you're completely in the open to at least one enemy. (no more "I'm only hiding from x")

A model may stay hidden over several turns, so long as they stay behind a wall or similar feature. They may even move around so long as they stay hidden while doing so. 

> While hiding, a model cannot shoot or cast spells without giving away its position. If a hidden model shoots, or moves so that the can be seen, he is no longer hidden and can be shot at as normal.

Author: ```suggestion
While hiding, a model cannot shoot or cast spells without giving away its position. If a hidden model shoots, or moves so that they can be seen, they are no longer hidden and can be shot at as normal.
```

Reviewer: Its kind of funny reading these now, its clear I wrote this stuff while bleary-eyed at 5am lol. Merge away

If you wish to either shoot at, cast spells at, or charge a _Hidden_ model your warriors may attempt to detect them. A model's detection range is twice their Initiative value in inches: An inattentive Orc with an Initiative value of 2 would therefore only attempt to detect enemies within 4". An eagle-eyed Elf with an Initiative of 5 however may attempt to detect enemies within 10"! Detecting an enemy requires an Initiative test, and each warrior may only attempt to detect once per turn. An model that is detected immediately loses its _Hidden_ status.

#### Terrain

The ruined city of Mordheim is a dark and dangerous place, where tumbled down towers and blasted houses form a vast maze of streets and alleyways.

> OPEN GROUND: The tabletop surface, floors of buildings, connecting overhangs, and horizontal gaps of less than 3". are all considered to be open ground and will not affect movement even if the model is charging. It can also go through doors and hatches without slowing down.

Author: ```suggestion
__Open Ground:__ The tabletop surface, floors of buildings, connecting overhangs, and horizontal gaps of less than 3". are all considered to be open ground and will not affect movement even if the model is charging. It can also go through doors and hatches without slowing down.
```

Reviewer: 👍

> DIFFICULT GROUND: Difficult ground includes steep or treacherous slopes, dense woodland or waist-deep water.

Author: ```suggestion
__Difficult Ground:__ Difficult ground includes steep or treacherous slopes, dense woodland or waist-deep water.
```

Reviewer: 👍

> WALLS AND BARRIERS: Walls, hedges and other low obstacles form barriers that you can either go around or leap over. A model can leap over a barrier that is less than 1" high. This does not affect its movement in any way.

Author: ```suggestion
__Walls and Barriers__ Walls, hedges and other low obstacles form barriers that you can either go around or leap over. A model can leap over a barrier that is less than 1" high. This does not affect its movement in any way.
```

Reviewer: 👍  Sexy italics.

| 8 | - |
| 9+ | - |

Some weapons are better at penetrating armour than their Strength value suggests (Elven bows, for example). This is covered in the entry for each particular weapon (see the Weapons & Armour section). 

> _Example: Jeremy wears heavy armour and carries a shield. His armour save is 4+. He is hit by a crossbow (Strength 4) and therefore he will save on a D6 roll of 5+ (i.e., 4+ 1 = 5+)._

Author: ```suggestion
_Example: Useless Jeremy wears heavy armour and carries a shield. His armour save is 4+. He is hit by a crossbow (Strength 4) and therefore he will save on a D6 roll of 5+ (i.e., 4+ 1 = 5+)._
```

Reviewer: Dammit I just wanted to be nice to Jeremy for once.

#### Injuries

Most warriors have a Wounds characteristic of 1, but some have a value of 2 or more. If the target has more than 1 wound then deduct 1 from his total each time they suffers a wound. For warbands with multiple heroes with multiple wounds it is strongly suggested to put dice next to wounded characters to show how many wounds they have remaining. So long as the model has at least 1 wound remaining they may continue to fight without penalty. As soon as a fighter's Wounds are reduced to zero, roll to determine the extent of their injuries. The player who inflicted the wound rolls a D6 for the wound that reduced the model to zero wounds and for every wound the model receives after that. If a model suffers several wounds in one turn, roll once for each of them and apply the highest result. 

| Roll | Result | Description |
| :-: | :-: | :-: |
| 1-2 | Knocked down | The force of the blow knocks the warrior down. Place the model face up to show that they have been _knocked down_. |
| 3-4 | Stunned | The target falls to the ground where they lie wounded and barely conscious. Turn the model face down to show that they have been _stunned_. |

> | 5-6 | Out of action | The target has been badly hurt and falls to the ground unconscious. They takes no further part in the game and are immediately removed from the battle. |

Author: ```suggestion
| 5-6 | Out of action | The target has been badly hurt and falls to the ground unconscious. They take no further part in the game and are immediately removed from the battle. |
```

Reviewer: 👍

Once the battle has begun Formal Alliances may not be broken. Warbands require such extensive briefing to believe that these dangerous strangers are their friends that coordinating elaborate betrayals during battle is impossible. If a scenario is won on the grounds of there being one last remaining warband then allied warbands will share the victory. Warbands that share victories in this way may each roll no more than three exploration dice, as there is far more competition for resources when scouring the city post-battle. Loot however may be divided up, though this would have to have been agreed before the battle.

Formal allegiances may only be negotiated between warbands with one degree of seperation in alignment (So Neutral warbands may only ally with Neutral, Lawful/Neutral, or Chaotic/Neutral for example) and may not take take place if either your warband has the 'Distrust' rule (for example, Dwarfs distrusting Elves) or your warband leader has a Hatred of the other warband's leader. 

> Informal alliances are moments where warbands warily take a step back from eachother, perhaps each sizing the other up as being a little too strong to be worth fighting - or taking a momentary reprieve to recover and prepare for their next attack. These alliances are the second-to-second judgements made by Warband leaders, and often communicated with little more than body language. These allegiances are momentary at best, and often nothing more than an attempt by one warband to get the other to expose its back. There are no restrictions on these informal alliances but also are nothing more than agreements between Leaders to temporarily focus their attentions elsewhere. For all intents and purposes the two warbands are still hostile to eachother - they are still the closest enemies for shooting, will still count as hostile for the purposes of frenzh, and will still prevent eachother from running. They also may not share a victory in a scenario where the victor is determined by routing.

Author: ```suggestion
Informal alliances are moments where warbands warily take a step back from one another, perhaps each sizing the other up as being a little too strong to be worth fighting - or taking a momentary reprieve to recover and prepare for their next attack. These alliances are the second-to-second judgements made by Warband leaders, and often communicated with little more than body language. These allegiances are momentary at best, and often nothing more than an attempt by one warband to get the other to expose its back. There are no restrictions on these informal alliances but also are nothing more than agreements between Leaders to temporarily focus their attentions elsewhere. For all intents and purposes the two warbands are still hostile to one another - they are still the closest enemies for shooting, will still count as hostile for the purposes of _frenzy_, and will still prevent one another from running. They also may not share a victory in a scenario where the victor is determined by routing.
```

Reviewer: 👍
